Specify the protocol in terms of VDAF evaluation (#154)
abetterinternet/ppm-specification: draft-ppm-protocol.md

## Task Configuration {#task-configuration}

A task centers around evaluation of a specific Verifiable Distributed
Aggregation Function (VDAF, see [VDAF]) over a set of client inputs. The VDAF
determines the type of input measurements and the type of the output of the
aggregation function. It also determines how many aggregators are involved (this

> document currently supports just two) and how many rounds of communication among

Reviewer: Please file an issue for this rounds question. I am not convinced that we should commit to a fixed number of rounds as a protocol invariant.

Author: Before I do, I'd like to chat in person about the implication of this restriction and why I feel it's a safe assumption. Just to be clear: the intention is that the VDAF scheme determines the number of rounds, not the wrapper protocol (i.e., this specification).

the aggregators are required to verify an input's validity. Prior to the start
of execution of the protocol, each participant must agree on the configuration
parameters for the task. A task is uniquely identified by its task ID:

~~~
opaque TaskId[32];
~~~

A `TaskId` is a unique identifier for a specific task among a set of tasks. It
is RECOMMENDED that this be set to a random string output by a cryptographically
secure pseudorandom number generator. Each task has the following parameters
associated with it:

* `aggregator_endpoints`: A list of URLs relative to which an aggregator's API
  endpoints can be found. Each endpoint's list MUST be in the same order. The
  leader's endpoint MUST be the first in the list. The order of the
  `encrypted_input_shares` in a `Report` (see {{uploading-reports}}) MUST be the
  same as the order in which aggregators appear in this list. The length of this

>   list MUST be two. [NOTE We intend to support multiple helpers in the future,

Reviewer: This restriction should appear in precisely one place so that we do not have to change it everywhere if we add multiple helpers. The first location is probably the right one.

Author: Good call. I removed this MUST here and the paranthetical above saying the protocol is only defined for two aggregators. I added a MUST for this at the end of {{task-configuration}}.

  newest report in a batch. This defines the boundaries with which the batch
  interval of each collect request must be aligned. (See
  {{batch-parameter-validation}}.)
* `public_param` and `verify_param`: The outputs of the VDAF setup algorithm,
  referred to as the public parameter and verification parameter respectively.

>   The client uses the poblic parameter to split its input into input shares, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The client uses the public parameter to split its input into input shares, and
```

  the aggregators use the verification parameter to verify the input's validity.
  The public parameter MUST be distributed to all clients and MAY be distributed
  to the servers. The verification parameter MUST be distributed to all

>   aggregators and MUST NOT be revealed to the clients.

Reviewer: It's quite hard to understand the role of the verification parameter without a description of the vdaf system

Author: Ack, I'll add a description of VDAFs in the overview for this PR.

  input share.
* `payload` is the encrypted input share.

To generate the report, the client begins by running the VDAF input-distribution
algorithm on the public parameter `public_param` and its measurement. This

> transforms the measurement into a pair of input shares, the first intended for
> the leader and the second intended for the helper. To encrypt each input share,
> the client first generates an HPKE {{!I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke}} context for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transforms the measurement into a set of input shares, one for each aggregator. To encrypt each input share,
the client first generates an HPKE {{!I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke}} context for the
```

aggregator by running

~~~
enc, context = SetupBaseS(pk,
                          "pda input share" || task_id || server_role)
~~~

where `pk` is the aggregator's public key, `task_id` is `Report.task_id` and

> `server_role` is a byte whose value is `0x00` if the aggregator is the leader
> and `0x01` if the aggregator is the helper. The bytestring `enc` is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`server_role` is a byte whose value is the index of the aggregator in the aggregator list. The bytestring `enc` is the
```

Or some such...

Author: Works for me, I thought we were still blocking on this change.

where `pk` is the aggregator's public key, `task_id` is `Report.task_id` and
`server_role` is a byte whose value is `0x01` if the aggregator is the leader

> and `0x00` if the aggregator is the helper. The bytestring `enc` is the

Author: Good catch.

## Verifying and Aggregating Reports {#pa-aggregate}

Once a set of clients have uploaded their reports to the leader, the leader and

> helper begin verifying and aggregating them. In order to enable the system to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
helper(s) begin verifying and aggregating them. In order to enable the system to
```

Author: I think if we're going to make this change, we'll have to actually specify how multiple helpers works. We can do this here, but my preference would be to wait for antoher PR.

handle very large batches of reports, this process can be performed
incrementally. To aggregate a set of reports, the leader sends a sequence of

> requests to the helper, the first of which contains the helper's encrypted input

Author: This is not currently specified.

~~~~
Leader                                                 Helper

VerifyStartReq (Reports 1-10) -------------------------------->  \
<------------------------------------ VerifyStartResp (State 1)  | Reports
VerifyStartReq (continued, State 1) -------------------------->  | 10-11
<------------------------------------ VerifyStartResp (State 2)  /

VerifyNextReq (Reports 11-20, State 2) ---------------------->  \
<------------------------------------ VerifyNextResp (State 3)  | Reports
VerifyNextReq (continued, State 3) -------------------------->  | 20-21
<------------------------------------ VerifyNextResp (State 4)  /

OutputShareReq (State 4) ----------------------------------->
<----------------------------------- OutputShareResp (Result)
~~~~
{: #pa-aggregate-flow title="Aggregation Process (batch size=20)"}

[TODO: Decide if and how the collector's request is authenticated.]

### Verify-Start Request

The *verify-start request* request is used by the leader to send a set of
reports to the helper. These reports MUST all be associated with the same PPM

> task. [[OPEN ISSUE: And the same batch, right?]]

Reviewer 2: A link to #150 would be appropriate in the `[[OPEN ISSUE]]`

For the second aggregator endpoint `[aggregator]` in `VerifyStartReq.task_id`'s
parameters, the leader sends a POST request to `[aggregator]/aggregate_start`
with the following message:

~~~
struct {
  TaskID task_id;
  opaque helper_state<0..2^16>;

>   opaque output_param<0..2^16-1>;

Reviewer 2: Are there any risks with letting the leader insert arbitrary `output_param` into requests sent to helper? In the Priov3 case, it seems this should always be empty or absent (because the output param is already known to all the parties participating in a task).

In the Hits case, though, a leader could tamper with the string prefixes in the collector's queries. This might be beyond the scope of this particular PR, but maybe the helper and collector should establish a mutually authenticated channel using each other's HPKE configs to ensure leader can't tamper with the output param.

Author: In terms of soundness, there is a risk of a network attacker tampering with this. For that we'll need some sort of sender authentication in the leader<->helper channel. (We've discussed this type of threat before, but I'm not sure we have a ticket for it.)

In terms of privacy, mutual authentication doesn't buy us anything because the leader can still cheat. That said, privacy ought to hold here regardless of what the cheating leader does (so long as the helper itself is honest). Of course, we need to prove this for every VDAF we want to implement. (For Prio this is trivial since the only valid output parameter is "".)

Reviewer 2: I wrote this up in #155. I think we should just put a TODO or a NOTE here referencing this issue and move on with this PR.

  VerifyStartSubReq seq<1..2^24-1>;
} VerifyStartReq;
~~~

The structure contains the PPM task, an opaque *helper state* string
(`helper_state`), and a sequence of *sub-requests* (`seq`), each corresponding
to a unique client report. The request also carries the output parameter
(`output_param`) used for VDAF evaluation. Sub-requests are structured as
follows:

~~~
struct {
  Time time;                       // Report.time
  uint64 nonce;                    // Report.nonce
  Extension extensions<4..2^16-1>; // Report.extensions
  opaque verify_message<1..2^16-1>;
  EncryptedInputShare helper_share;
} VerifyStartSubReq;
~~~

Each sub-request includes the report's timestamp, nonce, and extensions (`time`,
`nonce`, and `extensions` respectively) and a value called the verification
message (`verify_message`), generated as described in the next paragraph. The
first sub-request also carries the helper's encrypted input share
(`helper_share`).

The leader generates the verification message by decrypting its input share
`leader_share`. To do so, it first looks up the HPKE secret key `sk` associated

> with `leader_share.aggregato_config_id`. Next, it runs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with `leader_share.aggregator_config_id`. Next, it runs
```

~~~
context = SetupBaseR(leader_share.enc, sk,
                     "pda input share" || task_id || 0x00)
input_share = context.Open(time || nonce || extensions,

>                            leader_share.payload)

Author: `SetupBaseR` has a different info string, but yeah, we should unify this when we allow for multiple helpers.

~~~

where `task_id`, `time`, `nonce`, and `extensions` are the fields of the report
with the same name. If decryption succeeds, it runs the VDAF verify-start
algorithm to compute its local VDAF state and the verification message:

~~~
(state, VerifyStartSubReq.verify_message) = vdaf_start(

>       verify_param, aggregation_param, time || nonce, input_share)

Reviewer 2: Do we not need a parameter indicating whether the entity running `vdaf_start` is the leader or helper, so that it can tell whether the input share is compressed or not (if the VDAF is Prio)? Or do we encode that information into `input_share`?

Author: It's encoded by the `input_share`. I know you didn't like this redundancy, but it makes the VDAF syntax a lot simpler.

`[aggregator]/aggregate_next` with the following message:

~~~
struct {
  TaskID task_id;
  opaque helper_state<0..2^16>;
  VerifyNextSubReq seq<1..2^24-1>;
} VerifyNextReq;
~~~

* `task_id` is the same as task ID as the verify-start request.
* `helper_state` is the opaque state sent by the helper in response to the
  previous verify request.
* `seq` is the sequence of sub-requests. It has the same number of sub-requests
  as the previous request.

Each sub-request has the following structure:

~~~
struct {
  Time time;
  uint64 nonce;
  opaque verify_message<1..2^16-1>;
} VerifyNextSubReq;
~~~

Fields `time` and `nonce` have the same value as the corresponding sub-request
in the verify-start request. The helper's response consists of a `VerifyResp`
message constructed as described above.

Both aggregators compute verification message using the VDAF verify-next
algorithm as

~~~
(state, AggregateSubReq.verify_message) = vdaf_next(
          state, inbound_message)
~~~

where `inbound_message` is the verification message sent by the peer in response
to the previous request and `state` is the aggregator's VDAF state.

### Recovering the Output Share

> Once all rounds of the VDAF have been completed for a given report, each

Reviewer 2: The helper has nowhere but the `helper_state` blob to keep track of how many rounds have been executed. How does it know whether to execute `vdaf_next` or `vdaf_finish` for any `VerifyNextSubReq`? Perhaps we are missing something like `vdaf_is_finished(state) -> int` (but with a good name instead of that bad one)?

Author: The VDAF fixes the number of rounds. The first round uses vdaf_start and subsequent rounds use vdaf_next.

Reviewer 2: I buy that the number of rounds is a constant determined by the VDAF. But how does helper know what round it's on when it receives a `VerifyNextReq`? Implicitly a helper would have to keep a count of executed rounds in its `helper_state`, or we could require the VDAF to encode that into the `state` that gets passed into `vdaf_next`.

Author: I'd also be fine with adding a "round_number" field to the request body.

Reviewer 2: That could work, but then we have to consider what if any risks there are to allowing the leader to control the round number. If we put it in helper-controlled state, then it's protected by the encryption we already require from helper implementations.

Author: Good point! Either way the helper is going to have to keep track of its state, and thus what message to expect next. I think we should make no changes here and just make it clear that the helper has to keep track of this.

aggregator runs the VDAF verify-finish algorithm to recover its share of the
output:

~~~

> output_share = vdaf_finish(statre, inbound_message)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
output_share = vdaf_finish(state, inbound_message)
```

struct {
  TaskID task_id;
  Interval batch_interval;

>   opaque output_param<0..2^16-1>;

Reviewer 2: What should a collector put here in the Prio case? Empty string?

Author: Yes.

Reviewer 2: Sounds fine, but I think we should have explicit text instructing implementations to do this.

Author: The instruction is "the leader copies the output parameter verbatim from the collect request to verify-start request". Is that not already explicitly there?

Reviewer 2: So it is! I did notice one typo in the paragraph below. Resolving this thread.

} CollectReq;
~~~

The named parameters are:

* `task_id`, the PPM task ID.
* `batch_interval`, the request's batch interval.
* `output_param`, the output parameter with which the VDAF [VDAF] will be
  evaluated.

> Depending on the VDAF and how the leader is configured, th collect request may

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Depending on the VDAF and how the leader is configured, the collect request may
```

cause the leader to send a series of requests to the helper in order to compute

> their share of the output. Alternately, if `output_share` is empty or a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
their share of the output. Alternately, if `output_param` is empty or a
```
